On both sides? OK. All right. Here we go. This is an
interview with Thomas Beltran by Diana Elizondo
on November the 12th, 1989, at his home in 4603
Windlock in San Antonio, Texas, about Vietnam. In
the interest of accumulating knowledge, I'm
asking you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas
A&M Oral History Collection in the University
Archives. Is that all right with you? Yes. Right.
To begin with, can you just tell me about your
background, like when you were born, where did you
grow up? I was born in 1946, and I grew up on the east
side of San Antonio. Okay, and how was that like?
Tell me about your family. Mainly I was raised by my
grandparents because my parents were divorced
when I was about six years old. And... My
grandfather was mainly my role model.
How about your schooling? What did you think about
school? I liked school, and I wanted to go to
college and all that stuff. But my mother being a
single parent, and I had an adopted brother, and
she had to provide for both of us. So I didn't want to
be a burden on her anymore than necessary. So after
high school, I started working in a wood shop,
carpentry work. When was this, what year? In 1965.
And Vietnam had just started.
I did want to work longer, but then I got my draft
notice that I was going to be drafted into the Army.
So I didn't want to go into the Army because all my
grandfather and my uncles and my father had been in
the Army. And if I was going to go overseas and
fight, I wanted to be under the best conditions in
my favor, so I decided to join the Marine Corps. So
you mean like if you were with the Marines, what,
that you'd be better protected or learn things
better? Yeah, I felt I'd have more confidence and
better training in the Marines. What scared you
about the Army? I mean, what did it seem? To me, the
Army kind of lacked a certain discipline.
They didn't have what I would call a real... strict
discipline or coerciveness, working together
kind of thing. And you found that in the Marines?
Yes. How did you first hear about the Marines and
get that impression from them? Well, I used to,
when I was a kid I used to read a lot of war comics and
stuff like that. And that's where I got most of it
from, comic books. Okay, so when did you first hear
about Vietnam? Right after Kennedy was
assassinated, and it was still kind of in the
background, but Kennedy kept trying to get across
to us that we had to stop communism as far away from
our shores as possible. And that's why he was
sending, at first they started sending advisors
to Vietnam.
That's when I first heard about it. Did you ever,
when you were working, did you ever really want to
go over and fight? I mean, did you think, hey, I'd
like to do that, or? Well, it was like a fascination
at first, you know, because my, like I said, my
grandfather, he was in World War I, and then my
uncles were in World War II, and then my younger
relatives were in Korea. So I figured it was
Vietnam was my turn. Okay.
And at this time when you were called, were you
married yet? Or how were you living? Were you still
living with your mom then? Well, I was living with
my mother when I got my draft notice. And
I went ahead and joined the Marines and went to boot
camp. And then when I was home on my 30 days leave, I
got married. OK. And why did you get married? Well,
I just needed something to come home to. And I was
really in love with your aunt. How did she feel
about when she found out that you were drafted?
Well, she didn't like it. And she was worried about
it, but I guess It's just a part of life a man has to go
through. In those days it was. And your mom, how did
she feel about it? She was really practically
hysterical, crying. She wrote to our congressman
trying to get me out of going.
She was really hysterical to me. Okay. So when were
you actually drafted, and was it by the lottery
system, or was it... No, I wasn't drafted. I went
ahead and volunteered in the Marines. Okay. And
when you did, how long would your tour of duty be? In
Vietnam, it was 13 months. 13 months. Okay. Could
you tell me about, like, your... about... your
training, like what did they teach you in boot
camp? Was there like counter-insurgency tactics
or what did you concentrate on? Well, basically we
started off with hand-to-hand combat in boot camp
and then marksmanship, how to use, shoot real good
and the basics, map reading so you know where you
were at all the time. All the basic military
skills, what you learned And then when you make it
through boot camp, then they test you and you get
your specialized training. Which is what? Your
military occupational status. Like if you're
mechanically inclined, they'll send you to
either aviation school or armored vehicles,
things mechanical. And then if you... or into
electronics and stuff. They didn't send you
either to radar or radio school or whatever. So
what was your area of specialization? I went into
armored personnel carriers because I was
mechanically inclined. What does that mean?
Well, these were amphibious vehicles that we used
to go on river patrols and to make beach landings
off ships. We would drive off a ship into the water
and make beach landings. So you were in charge of
making sure that those machines worked? Yeah.
Okay. Does that mean that you would be engaged in
combat? Do you know what I mean? Yes. When I was in
Vietnam, we were what was called, used as a
blocking force. The infantry would sweep through
an area of the country, and we would be hidden in the
jungle. And whatever enemy they pushed towards
us, we'd be like a wall there to stop them. Okay.
With our firepower. All right. And during your
training, did you notice any difference or any,
like, racism? Like, were there just white
officers and Hispanic, you know, units? Or was it
integration of troops, you know, blacks and
whites and everybody all together? And how did you
feel about your officers? Yeah, well, when I was in
boot camp, we had black and white. drill
instructors and some Hispanics, quite a few
Filipinos and other nationalities that would do
their five years military service to get
citizenship in the United States. What did you
think of your officers? I thought they were a real
good class of officers.
They were more, a little bit more human than I
thought, you know. They were more sensitive than I
had expected. I mean, like in what sense? Well,
they, they felt for their, their troops a little
more than, than I had expected. I thought they'd
just be barking orders all the time instead of
trying to get to know you and, and learn about you
and work with you in whatever situation you were
in. So you felt that in your unit... Is the unit that
you train with in boot camp the one that you go out
to? No, no. After boot camp, like I said, you each go
into whatever you're inclined, your military
occupation. And then after your specialized
school, then we went to... Jungle Warfare School
to prepare for Vietnam. Where was that at? It was at
Camp Pendleton, California. And basically what
we learned is how to camouflage ourselves to blend
in with the countryside and restrict our
movements and they'd give us an objective and we'd
go and blow it up and learn first aid and how to care
for wounds in the jungle because they get infected
right away and all that stuff. And then we were
broken up in groups of, there was 300 of us that flew
to Vietnam. But once you go from here to Okinawa,
well, Wake Island was the midpoint. And then we
landed on Okinawa. We were again split up. We
turned in all our stateside gear and drew jungle
equipment. And then we flew, like I flew from
Okinawa to Chu Lai, Vietnam. That's where I
started. It's about in the second core area.
Mainly I was in the second core and the I core area.
which is the upper northern part of Vietnam. Oh, so
close to the northern border? Yeah, the last few
months I ended up along the DMZ, the Demiller
County. Oh, yeah, okay. Just a little bit about
your training, the jungle warfare. Did the
conditions there in Camp Pendleton, were they the
same as when you were out there fighting? I mean,
could you say that, that the jungle that was there
in Vietnam was the same as California? No, no. No,
California is real. Camp Elton especially is real
rocky and hilly, but Vietnam is a dense kind of
jungle. Like in July, for three miles inland, it
was nothing but white sand and sparse growth. And
when you got after the three miles in, it became the
dense jungle covered mountains and hills.
Nothing over here prepared us, really, for what we
were going to go through. I mean, when you saw the
jungle and everything, you said, like, this is not
what we were trained for. All right. Yeah, it was
kind of spooky and eerie, yeah. But, you know, when
you're young, you feel like you can do anything, go
through anything. So the looks of it didn't bother
me. Mainly it was the heat that bothered me, the
hot. Uh-huh. Because we were hot. hot and sweaty
all the time. And everything was an effort, you
know, when you're under those conditions. The
hot, humid air was thick and musty to breathe and
everything. Okay. So when did you actually, what
date could you give me that you left camp to
Vietnam? It's easier to remember because it was
May, about May the 15th. It was several days before
my 20th birthday. I was 19 years old. So that was
what year? 19... 1965. 1965 you went? Yeah. Okay.
Alright. Well, 66 actually. Yeah. May of 66. Okay,
that's when you went. Yeah. Okay, and when you
left, what did you think you were going to do in
Vietnam? I mean, what was the mission and what was
the point? Were you also advising or helping
Arvin? No. We were already involved in the combat
stage. Well, I knew our mission was mainly to keep
the infantry supplied with whatever we could
carry, because in this amphibious vehicle, we
could carry ammunition, food, troops,
everything. It was like a big cargo carrying type
of vehicle. Okay. On the way to Vietnam, what kind
of plane did you go in, and was it all the men? What
were the men talking about? What did you all talk
about? Well, there was 300 of us, and we flew over in
a C-141. They call it the Starlifter. And there
was, all the time we were making remarks about the
plane, that it looked like, because when we landed
on When we were going to take off from Edwards Air
Force Base, it broke. One of the engines or
something. So we ended up spending an additional
two days at Edwards Air Force Base. And it was
mainly an Air Force Base. And they weren't used to
having 300 Marines running around their base. So
we got a lot of comments from the the dependents
there that didn't like having 300 Marines running
all over, running wild on their base. And so when it
finally did take off, we were all kind of worried,
because usually you are way up in the air and you can
see nothing but the Pacific Ocean down below, and
it's something like a 10 to 12 hour flight from
Edwards to Wake Island. And so one of the guys says,
how does it feel being in 30,000 nuts and bolts
flying in close formation. There was a good sense
of humor and camaraderie on the airplane all the
time. Did anybody ever express fear, like, oh, I'm
afraid of this, or, you know, if something
happens, but don't, you know. No, a lot of us, you
know, Being in the Marines, you learn your
discipline. You keep your fears hidden to
yourself. You don't show it or make it known.
So once you got to Vietnam, your commanding
officers, did you think that they were competent?
I mean, at the beginning, did you think they were?
Were you confident with them? Yes. There was a
captain in charge of our company. I thought he was
real competent. And there was this one weird staff
sergeant, he was a Filipino. We didn't have any
confidence at all in him. Why? Well, he kind of
like, he was afraid to die and he slept in a box at
night in case the enemy came and overran us. They
wouldn't find him and kill him, so he'd hide
himself in a box and sleep in a box at night. Like a
cardboard box or something? Well, it was a wooden
box. So you're talking about the Filipino officer
now? Well, he was a staff sergeant, and he was only
there for about three more months, and I guess he
was... He realized he was getting real close to
coming home, and he didn't want anything to happen
to him. So where would he put this cardboard? Was it
a cardboard box he would sleep in? No, it was like a
wooden oblong crate, like a shipping crate. Yeah.
And he kept it in a tent, because we all lived in
tents in those days. But he really didn't sleep in
that crate. Was he abused by the other officers and
by maybe even you all? I don't know, because he was
more like a supply
staff sergeant, and we would just go to him when we
needed parts to put on our vehicles and stuff. We
didn't have that much to do with him, except at
night when we were on beach guard, sometimes he'd
be the duty NCO, and he'd have to come and check us to
see if we were awake and on duty. Did he do that well
or? Yeah, yeah, he was real good at it. Okay,
because I was going to say, if he ever gave you an
order, was it like, yeah, whatever, or would you
really listen to him? Well, I guess basically we
didn't really have to listen to him. And, oh, go
ahead. Because of the, you know, military
discipline and rank and all that stuff, general
orders. Okay, and so your head officer was who, and
where, could you tell me about himself? Was he
white or what? Well, Captain, I think his name was
Captain Dittmar, yeah, and he was a white Anglo, I
guess what you call an Anglo, and then his
executive officer, I don't, I can't remember his
name, but he was a, what was called the top first
sergeant. He was real intelligent because he'd
spent 20 years in the reserves already. And when he
got to Vietnam, he knew quite a bit about
amphibious operations. That's what I was in,
amphibious operations. Okay, so when you did get
there, your assignment was to help bring in
supplies, right? Keep the infantry supplied with
ammunition, food, and water, and also help them
secure their perimeter. Whenever we'd move them
deeper into the jungle, we'd use our vehicles to
knock down trees, and clear a field of fire for them
in case the enemy attacked them at night. They
would have a clear, open field of fire.
What did they ever told you about the Vietnam
people, Vietnamese? I mean, had they ever said,
well, the people are this way. You need to act this
way. How were you told to treat the people, the
citizens of the country? We were told to treat them
with respect and not make fun of their
surroundings or their homes or wherever they
lived and to have as little as possible to do with
them because our vehicles were highly
susceptible to sabotage and we stayed as far away
from them as we could so they wouldn't plant a bomb
or something on our vehicles. Was there always a
fear that they might have VCE or what was your
biggest fear with them? Yeah, they were mainly
pro-Viet Cong, and they would try anything to put
us out of commission.
But there's something about Orientals that, like
a certain mystique, that I consider them a little
weird. And
I don't know, when I used to look at them and their
slanted eyes, you know. It was just something
weird I didn't like about it. And then their small,
wiry frames. Most of them are small, wiry. And I
just, a certain basic, like a repellent. They were
a little repelling to me. I couldn't stand them.
Really? Yeah. And it was weird to me because I grew
up on the east side of town with black people and
Polish people. And I surprised myself that I was
feeling a little prejudice toward them, that I
didn't like them. But I figured it was the
indoctrination I received in the Marines about
killing the Kong. that these Orientals all looked
alike. So that you could never really distinguish
if they were... Right. I had already grouped them
and classified them because of my training. And I
never could bring myself to lie. Did you ever go
into any of their villages? Yeah. Another mission
we had was to give them medical aid. And we'd take
this team of doctors into a village, and we'd stop
on the outskirt of the village and guard our
vehicles while the doctors went in and treated
them for whatever. They treated a lot of
infections, ear, nose, throat infections, and
there was a lot of malaria and stuff that the
doctors would go into a village and treat these
people. So mainly, I think my balance at the time, I
started 50% of it was good, and then the other 50%
was combat and stuff. 50% good, you mean like
helping out the people? Right, mainly we helped a
lot of people. So when you said you helped, did you
just bring the doctors or you helped assist the
patients? Well, if the doctors needed our help,
we'd go ahead and help them, but... mainly like
there was three crewmen per vehicle and we always
went in teams of two vehicles we just when you had to
guard this big 20-foot vehicle about 12 feet high
and you know you had to spread out far enough to
where you could watch your half of the vehicle the
other guy watched the other half of the vehicle and
another guy would be inside on the radios
listening for any trouble. Did anything ever
happen? Were you all ever attacked while you were
in a village helping? Yeah, once in a while we'd get
sniper fire.
We'd get inside, close it all up because they were
bulletproof to a certain caliber of weapon and the
bullets would just bounce off because mainly Back
in those days, the Vietnamese had carbines and
small arms. They didn't drag around anything big
or heavy enough to knock us out of action. And we'd
go in the village, get the doctors, and then go on
back to our area. And we'd report what had
happened. There was this one sniper
that was operating in our area, they called him the
B.A.R. kid, and everybody was afraid of him
because he carried a Browning automatic rifle.
That's what B.A.R. stands for. And he had picked
off a lot of people, a lot of Marines, because there
was this one point where you come to this river, and
there was a ferry. The Navy operated a ferry there.
And the military, whoever was going to cross
there, had to wait for the ferry, and that was when
the sniper would would open up and kill people with
his an automatic weapon with a 30 caliber range it
has a lot of range and a real flat trajectory so he
was really a good shot with it when you said they had
the your enemy or whatever had small little
carbines and Did that do anything to you? Like, you
thought, well, they really aren't going to hurt me
because they only have these small weapons and we
have all this great, I mean, how much, what kind of
military weapons did you have compared to them?
And did you think you had more confidence because
of what you had than they did? Yes, I considered our
weapons better and more effective than theirs.
But, like, they operated most of the time with the
element of surprise in their favor. Like you never
received a big advance warning of a big attack.
Most of the time, we got ambushed, a surprise
attack. So even if they had their small weapons,
they had the element of surprise in their favor. So
it was still worrisome to be over there, that
constant. They had to be on constant guard all the
time because that's how they did get their
advantages by a sneak attack. So you didn't really
underestimate them then, right? No, never did.
Did you ever have any contact with Arvin? And if you
did, what so? What were your impressions about
Arvin? The Arvins were, you know, basically
afraid and they were real young men. Their
training wasn't all that good, and they lacked a
lot of self-confidence. I guess because they were
there a lot longer than we were all their lives, and
they knew what their enemy was capable of. So there
was a lot of cowardice among them, a lot of them. The
way I knew this was our headquarters was right by an
ARVN training camp. And every once in a while, we'd
go and take supplies.
Fresh water was hard to come by where we were at. So
we had these big water trailers that we called
water buffalos that would hold around 500 gallons
of water. And we'd haul those around. And
our duties were rotated. Every once in a while, it
would be our turn to go and supply the armament And
we'd start talking, because their instructors
were the special forces, the green berets. And
they'd be training them. And they'd tell us, we
lost so many Arvin last night, they ran off with
their weapons to join the Viet Cong. So I knew a lot
more, because I covered a lot more territory. And
then when we went on operations that we did carry
the Arvin, One time we were going to drop them off to
go patrol through this village and they didn't
want to get off the vehicle. They were afraid. You
mean like you stopped and they just wouldn't get
off? Yeah. How did you get them off? We pushed them
out and kicked them out. We threatened them and
threw them out. What did you think once they got
off? That they were going to turn around and go home
or what? Well, probably... They'd probably just
go and hide in the jungle and not fulfill their
mission. Did you ever think that they really
wanted this war, that they stood behind it? No, I
don't think they wanted the war. And they'd be
willing to swing with whoever was in authority at
the time. They'd go that way. So they were with you
mainly for the foods and the training?
Protection, yeah. till we got kicked out and the
North Vietnamese took over. What did you think
about the Green Berets there? I thought the Green
Berets were real effective and they weren't
afraid of any situation they came across because
we used to go and pick them up. They go out on their
missions for months And then they'd radio in where
they were at, and we'd go. Sometimes the only way to
get there was by a river, because during the
monsoon season when it rained all the time, we were
the only ones that could operate helicopters, and
planes couldn't fly in dense cloud, rainy type of
weather. So we'd go and pick them up and bring them
back from their missions, and we'd talk to them.
And this one group had been out for a month, and
whenever they would come across an enemy
encampment, they would call in artillery fire or
naval gunfire, whatever was available, and
destroy that camp, and then pack up and run and
hide. Because once the fire was called in on the
enemy, they'd start looking for whoever was
calling in the fire on them. And we would talk a lot
with them. I thought they were doing a real good
job, real effective. Did you ever have any chance
or did you ever want to be a part of the Green Berets?
No, not really. I was mainly content with being in
the Marines. And we also worked with the toughest
unit in the Marines is the recon. What is it?
They're reconnaissance. They do almost
everything. The same thing as the Green Berets
did. They go out in the jungle and find enemy
encampments. And they decide what kind of
harassment they're going to do to that enemy.
Either they call in artillery fire, naval
gunfire, or aircraft. Or else they hide real far
away and just shoot one of them to demoralize the
others. You know, they'd stay hidden and then pick
another one off and have a shocking effect on the
others. To where they'd eventually, like,
retreat or... Yeah, they'd get demoralized and
wouldn't want to organize an attack against us.
Um, When you were there and all these missions you
went on, did you ever feel like there was a certain
point you were going, you know, like a linear
warfare, like your objective was to get up to that
border and push them all the way back or what? No, we
never had that kind of an objective. It was just
what they consisted of. Yeah, it was, you'd take a
hill one day and then you'd get orders to move on to
somewhere else and forget about that area. Do you
ever think, what's the point? Yeah, it got kind of,
we all started wondering when the politicians
were going to make up their mind to go ahead and win
it, because it was like a cat and mouse game we were
carrying on over. When you say the politicians and
winning it, what did winning it mean? The
politicians would do what? Agree to do what? Give
us the orders to go ahead and invade North Vietnam
and put them out of action and bring them under
military control, our control. So
what did, I don't understand because you feel
that, did you feel you had the manpower and the
equipment and everything to go ahead and invade
North Vietnam and do away with it? Yes, when I was
over there, We were, we had just built, this was the
biggest air base in Southeast Asia. It was, had
been built in July. It was a big landing strip for
airplanes. And at night we would guard them. And
then I remember when LBJ or Lyndon Baines Johnson,
he started, he ordered the first bombing of the
North, Vietnam. All day and night for a week,
planes were landing, loading up, and taking off. I
had never seen so many airplanes in my whole life
getting fully loaded with bombs and everything
and taking off. And this was 15, 20 minutes apart
for a whole week, landing and taking off, landing
and taking off. Like for 24 hours a day, this is?
Yeah. I had never experienced that. I didn't even
think we had that much air power. Why did he do that?
Why did you think LBJ did that? To try and make them,
bring them to their knees, make them give up, to
break the will of the people. And did it to you, or
what happened? No, it just made them madder, made
them try harder. They dug tunnels and moved
everything underground to get away from the
bombs. Do you think that in any way that this
bombing hit innocent people that weren't
involved and got them turned against the U.S.?
Yeah, I'm sure it did, because every so often in my
past experiences, I've talked with pilots that
were over there in Vietnam, and they'd say when
they were going to make a bombing run, they would
shoot these missiles at them, so they'd speed up
and outrun the missiles, well, where's the
missile going to go when it runs out of fuel? Back to
the ground and blow up the same people that fired it
at them. So not only were we bombing them and
hurting their people, but the same weapons they
used on us when they ran out of fuel would have to hit
the ground again and explode or detonate. Did you
ever know of any instances where the aircraft may
have hit U.S. forces? Do you ever remember
anything like that? Yeah, a lot of Marines that
were wounded over there, when I was at Camp
Pendleton, they would tell us that sometimes the
fighting would get so fierce that they'd have to
call in artillery fire right on their own position
or aircraft. This one guy was telling me they were
fighting this North Vietnamese Army unit. And
they called in for aircraft support. And this F4
was coming to help him. And he said that he didn't
want to shoot because there was a lot of air
turbulence. It was real windy that day, up in the
high upper altitude. And they said, we don't give a
heck where you hit. Just open up, shoot. And he
ended up shooting five of his own fellow Marines.
because of the air turbulence. A plane shakes a lot
like that when there's air turbulence. How did
that affect the men and the morale? Well, they were
so besieged by this North Vietnamese army unit
that they didn't care. It was either lose some of
them, or this army unit would massacre all of them.
So they'd rather sacrifice a few so that some of
them would live. Can you describe what type of
warfare you were involved in and different
examples of your combat missions? Mainly what
most of the fighting we did was at night
on river patrols and beach guard. At night we would
spread a whole platoon of tractors along the
beach, say about 100 yards apart, and our mission
was because the Vietnamese would fish every night
off the coast and they had orders to keep one light
aft and to stay
not to come any closer than 500 yards to the beach or
else we had orders to sink them because they were
suspected of sneaking in weapons and explosives
and stuff. So we'd spend the night watching them,
and every once in a while, we'd get sniper fire from
behind us. So we'd turn around and start some,
every other tractor would turn around and start
firing inland while the opposite was still
watching the beach. So one night we were firing
away, and we started getting even heavier fire
back. So we got on the radios, and we found out that
there was an infantry unit And we were hitting them
with our fire. You mean it was the U.S.? Well, it was
another Marine unit. And what had happened, this
sniper had gotten between us, and the sniper would
shoot at us, so he would draw our fire, and he knew
that all our straight bullets were going to be
hitting into that Marine base. Well, there are
lots of examples of this. Oh, yeah. Yeah, it
happened quite a bit. Especially at night, and the
range of our weapons, machine guns, some Marines
would just spray, shoot, and not aim at any
particular target.
And why was night warfare better than day? I didn't
say it was better, but mainly those were the kind of
missions we were stuck with because the enemy, all
the enemy movements were at night because, you
know, our airplanes couldn't find them and they
felt safer under the cover of darkness. They could
move a lot more heavy equipment. And then we had to
patrol rivers at night that we thought the enemy
was using to, to float cargo and ammunition.
Because you could move faster on a river than
through the jungle carrying stuff.
But most of my missions were at night. The missions
we did get during the day, we would move an infantry
company deeper into the jungle or supply them with
ammunition. Sometimes we'd be loaded with
nothing but mortar shells, explosives. And then
we'd be target, we could draw sniper fire from a lot
further off because these huge amphibs could be
seen miles away. And then the noise of our engines
would give us away too. Were you ever in any
hand-to-hand combat or could you ever like see the
VC or who would you say, I mean how would you call
your enemy? What did you call them? Usually VC or?
Yeah. What names did you call them? The Viet Cong or
Charlie, stuff like that. Or sometimes we called
them, uh, uh, gooks.
Yeah, a couple of times they were close enough to
where we threw grenades at them. One time they were
trying to sneak up on us. And we threw grenades and
killed three of them. But it was very rare we got
that close to them. Mainly, we'd shoot them pretty
far off with machine guns and stuff. And then there
was this one village.
We were with this infantry company on this hill,
and you could see down at this river valley and a
village. And the infantry company, there was a
little island in the middle of this river, and it
was called Shark Island. because the ocean over
here and every once in a while some sharks would
come up that river. There was a lot of sharks in the
China Sea and that's why they call it Shark Island
because from that island every so often you'd see a
shark. Well when the fishing boats were going out
from that village they'd have to stop by that
island and there was Marines there checking their
IDs to make sure that the Viet Cong didn't sneak
back and infiltrate. And then about 1 o'clock in
the morning, they'd send a patrol in through that
village to look and to make sure that Viet Cong
weren't infiltrating or getting ready to mount an
assault. And we'd be guarding our vehicles
because the infantry, a lot of times, they would
kind of like disown us. They said Amtraks, keep
your vehicles away. If a shell hits it, it's going
to blow up like a giant bomb and kill. So we'd have to
be away from the infantry in our own little area.
And we'd have to set up our own guard and take turns
at night. And there's one particular night, this
infantry patrol that went into that village, they
started getting shot at real bad. a Viet Cong
force, we didn't know how many in that village. And
when they came up on them, so they were getting shot
at
pretty bad. And
they called in for air support and these
helicopters came and started You could see the
machine gun fire like a red line just outlining the
whole village. And the infantry was right in the
middle of it. So they thought they had had it, and
they started burning the whole village down and
killing everybody.
And it wasn't a pretty sight the next day. What did
y'all have to do, go through it? Yeah, we had to go in
there and get the bodies out. And whoever was left
alive, we had to get them, you know, medical aid and
stuff.
It was pretty bad. Was it always just firing? I
mean, what about napalm or any of those
defoliants? Well, whenever there was a big, yeah,
there was a lot of defoilant sprayed all around us.
that Agent Orange, there was a, we were involved in
a lot of experimental stuff too, like they were
developing these smart bombs, and when they moved
us up to the, just below the DMC, there was a bridge
over this big river, it was called Nammo Bridge,
and the Air Force was experimenting with these
smart bombs. Those are those bombs that detect
things? Yeah. Like one airplane will drop or
they'll plant a transmitter on a bridge that they
want to blow up, and this plane will come over and
drop this bomb, and it locks in on that signal, and
it will destroy that bridge. Well, they had picked
this bridge to experiment on, and we were guarding
it. And they dropped this one of those smart bombs.
We could see it with a parachute coming down. And,
you know, they didn't tell us everything about the
experiment. But it blew over on the enemy, in deep
enemy territory. And we had to go and get it back at
all costs. Why did you have to get the bomb back?
Because there was certain data inside of it that
the Air Force wanted. So they could keep working on
that bomb and in perfecting it or improving it. And
we lost quite a few guys trying to get it back. You
all did get it though? Yeah, we got it back. So when
it went down, it was shot to mess up this bridge,
right? But then you had a, what data? Well, it was
like a dummy just gathering data. You know, I
couldn't tell you exactly what it was, but...